# Comparing Brain Atlases on the Basis of Morphometricity estimates

Analysis code and results are presented here: https://annafurtjes.github.io/Comparing_atlases/



Many different brain atlases exist that subdivide the human cortex into dozens or hundreds of regions-of-interest (ROIs). The choice of which brain atlas to use in neuroimaging studies is rarely justified, it affects study results, and studies using different atlases are hard to compare, which may contribute to the replication crisis across the neurosciences. Here, we attempt to provide a fair comparison between seven popular brain atlases (Yeo, Desikan-Killiany, Destrieux, Jülich-Brain, Gordon, Glasser, Schaefer, vertex-wise measures), to determine which atlas is most suitable to explain behavioural traits in the UK Biobank sample (N~40,000). Across seven behavioural traits including age, sex, body mass index, and cognitive ability, we use linear mixed models to estimate whole-brain morphometricity, which is the proportion of trait variance explained by a given atlas. Likelihood ratio tests are used to compare predictive performances between brain atlases. We found a median 3.41-fold increase in morphometricity between the lowest (34 ROIs, Yeo atlas) and the highest dimensional atlas (300,000 vertices), which widely differed but remained substantial across behavioural traits and brain measurement types (range of 1.49-fold to 15.17-fold increases). Atlas dimensionality reliably predicted trait morphometricty using linear-log models, and we provide a simple formula to infer morphometricity expected dependent on the number of atlas regions. None of the empirical atlases (from Yeo to Schaefer) yielded brain-behaviour associations any larger than expected by random parcellations. Furthermore, we found that atlases were complimentary rather than redundant in the trait variance they explained, suggesting that analyses considering low dimensional atlases tend to be restricted to atlas-specific dimensions of variance. Taken together, our findings should motivate future studies to favour vertex-wise brain representations over coarser atlases whenever possible, or to consider repeating analyses across multiple atlases, should the use of low-dimensional atlases be necessary. Alongside small sample sizes and large sampling variation, the insights uncovered here highlight brain atlas choices to be a contributor to the lack of reproducibility in neuroimaging studies. 